This document is to keep a record of the design approach taken when designing this controller/CRD. I will aim to include a small blurb for every commit pushed to the repository. 

All development is performed on an OpenSUSE WSL installation, using minikube to test controller behavior and validate the code/CRD. 

Initial commit included only the ASSIGNMENT.md that was provided as a guideline for the coding challenge. 

Next step was to create a baseline custom resource definition for the NamespaceClass. I used the following blog to come up with a simple CRD, modifying the base example to : https://medium.com/@disha.20.10/building-and-extending-kubernetes-a-writing-first-custom-controller-with-go-bc57a50d61f7 . At this stage, the CRD does not meet the criteria needed for the assignment, and serves as a base to build on and add fields. 

Following this, I had Claude generate a basic controller that monitors namespaces, printing their labels any time they're modified. This follows what I believe to be a healthy use of AI tooling: boilerplate code that gets the hooks in the right places but doesn't immediately surge past understanding of the problem/solution.
Running this controller locally, I validated that it retrieves all namespaces, detects when new ones are added, and successfully accesses their labels:

  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=kube-public
Controller started, watching namespaces...
[ADDED] Namespace: kube-system
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=kube-system
[ADDED] Namespace: default
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=default
[ADDED] Namespace: dummy-ns
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=dummy-ns
[MODIFIED] Namespace: dummy-ns
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=dummy-ns
  namespaceclass.akuity.io/name=test-nsc

However, this approach is too simple, and lacks the Reconcile functionality needed for handling edits in the cluster. I committed here, but changes are necessary to get this simple controller into a more standard Reconcile format, which is more of the standard for Kubernetes controllers. 

An extension to my previous prompt 'upgraded' the controller code to use a standard reconcile loop. It has been tested as well, with virtually identical behavior but a more standard 'reconcile' function, which is familiar to me because of my past work on the Dell CSM Operator. 

Controller synced, starting workers...
Reconciling namespace: default
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=default
Reconciling namespace: dummy-ns
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=dummy-ns
  namespaceclass.akuity.io/name=test-nsc
Reconciling namespace: kube-node-lease
Reconciling namespace: kube-public
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=kube-public
Reconciling namespace: kube-system
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=kube-system
  kubernetes.io/metadata.name=kube-node-lease

This also merits a commit, but following that, I want to go through the code and make sure that I understand the decisions behind it, and add TODOs for sections that need expansion. 

The first thing to note when looking at the assignment specification and our current code is that the controller must actually monitor two types of resources: we want to take action when Namespaces change, but we also want to act when NamespaceClasses change. So, we will need to upgrade the controller to have two separate reconcile loops, one for each resource type, and we will need informers for each. Another prompt gets our boilerplate setup for "watch these resource types", which should put us in a better position to start cleaning up/expanding on the base generated code. I also created a simple NSC sample yaml to apply to the cluster so that there was NamespaceClass for the controller to pick up and monitor/reconcile. 
It is important to note that Claude provided the following insights for its generated code, meaning it went further than simply creating a second Reconcile/informer:
Relationship model. I assumed Namespaces opt into a class via a label (namespaceclass.example.com/name: my-class), since you didn't specify the linking mechanism — let me know if it's actually a field on a namespace annotation or something else and I'll adjust.
One shared queue, tagged keys. Both informers feed the same workqueue, with each entry tagged {kind, name} so processNextItem dispatches to reconcileNamespace or reconcileNamespaceClass. This keeps a single worker pool instead of duplicating the loop.
Cross-resource fan-out. This is the part that actually makes it a "real" controller for two related types: when a NamespaceClass changes, all Namespaces referencing it need re-reconciling, not just the class itself. I added a cache index (byNamespaceClassIndex) on the namespace informer, so reconcileNamespaceClass can cheaply look up affected namespaces and re-enqueue them — no full list/scan.
Reads come from the informer cache, not the API server. Both reconcileNamespace and reconcileNamespaceClass read via GetIndexer().GetByKey(...), which is fast and doesn't hit rate limits, at the cost of possibly-slightly-stale data (bounded by informer resync).

This is the point where I am jumping in to start tweaking, commenting, and making TODOs, since the basic framework (controller that monitors two types of resources for changes) has now been established. 

After reading through the current controller code and getting an understanding of the flow, I have created some TODO comments in the controller outlining what needs to be done in both of the reconcile loops. Now I need to consider how to go about storing past application of a class, switching between classes, etc. 
First, this will require improvements to the CRD itself, so that it contains the fields needed for applying what must be applied in the namespace. 